# PA3: Runtime

In this assignment, you'll extend your Grumpy virtual machine to perform garbage collection and to support the creation and management of threads. 

```
                                                   /--------------\
                                                   |     GC       | <-- PA3
                                                   \--------------/
                                                         |||
                /-------------\                    /--------------\
<filename.s> => | assemble.rs | => <filename.o> => |     vm       | => program's result
                \-------------/                    \--------------/
                  ^| PA1                                 ^| PA2
```

The assignment has two parts. In the first, you will implement a copying garbage collector for your VM from PA2. In the second, you'll extend your garbage-collected VM to support the creation and management of user-level threads. We discuss each part of the assignment in turn. 

**NOTE: This is a pair assignment, just like PA2.**

1. You're welcome to work with the same person you worked with in PA2 or to choose a new partner.
2. Only one partner need submit.
3. Make sure your `README` contains both partners' names.

## Part O: VM Revisited

Make sure your VM from the previous assignment is in working order. If you need help, come talk to us in office or lab hours.

## Part I: Reference Counting

Extend your VM from PA2 to perform reference counting. Refer to Appel 13.2 and the lecture notes to review reference counting.

For **Part I**, your VM extended with reference counting will have the same interface as your VM from PA2 except that it will keep track of references to objects on the heap during execution. Specifically, it should:

1. Accept the name of a GrumpyVM bytecode `<filename.o>` as its first command-line argument;
2. Execute the file, using reference counting for any data on the heap;
3. Print the program's result to `stdout` using the textual encoding described in PA2 (`Vi32(-3)` for the integer `-3`, etc.). 

More specific to reference counting, you will also need to meet the following guidelines:

4. Write at least 2 unit tests specific to reference counting:
    - One should verify that your reference counting implementation removes data with 0 references
    - One should verify that the data you clear from the heap is used by Alloc if a spot exists with enough spaces
5. When clearing spots from the heap, do not change the size of the heap, reference counting does not de-fragment memory
6. If your VM cannot complete allocation, even with the space freed by the reference counter, then your VM should exit with a nonzero exit code

## Part II: Garbage Collection

Extend your VM from PA2 to perform copying garbage collection. Refer to Appel 13 and to the lecture notes if you forget exactly how copying collection works. 

For **Part II**, your VM extended with copy garbage collection will have the same interface as your VM from PA2 except that it may additionally perform garbage collections during the execution of a program. In particular, it should: 

1. Accept the name of a GrumpyVM bytecode `<filename.o>` as its first command-line argument;
2. Execute the file, possibly triggering one or more garbage collections;
3. Print the program's result to `stdout` using the textual encoding described in PA2 (`Vi32(-3)` for the integer `-3`, etc.). 

To make it easy for us to test your garbage collector, we ask that you additionally follow these guidelines:

4. Your VM should trigger a garbage collection *exactly when* the program attempts to `Alloc` an object that would not fit in the heap. For example, if the heap is occupied by `1000` of `1024` possible values (`1024` values being the size of the heap as specified in PA2), and the program attempts to allocate an object of size `25` values, your VM must trigger a garbage collection.

5. On each garbage collection, your VM must print to `stderr` (NOTE: not `stdout`!) exactly the following metadata:

```
GC start: heap_size = X values
GC end: heap_size = Y values
```

where `X` is the number of values in the heap right before the collection and `Y` is the number of values after. 

6. If your VM cannot complete an allocation even after a GC, your VM should exit with a nonzero error code. Make sure, in this case, that you've printed intermediate GC statistics to `stderr` as directed above (that is, those generated by GCs before your VM ran out of memory).

### Testing

To test your solution, run your `vm` on one of the following four test cases: 

```
tests/fact2.o
tests/heap.o
tests/heap2.o
tests/heap3.o
```

**Example:** The command:

```
> ./vm tests/heap3.o 2> gc-stats
```

should produce output:

```
Vi32(10)
```

on `stdout`. 

The `2>` redirects `stderr` to file `gc-stats` which should contain exactly the text:

```
GC start: heap_size = 1012 values
GC end: heap_size = 103 values
```

The program we used to generate `tests/heap3.o` was: 

```
(fun f (x i32) -> i32
  (cond (== x (/ 3 1))
    3
    (seq (alloc 100 false) (f (- x 1)))))
    
(fun g (x i32) -> i32
  (let a (alloc 1 (alloc 100 10))
    (seq (f 15)
         (get (get a 0) 50))
    ))
%
(g 0)
```

You can decipher this program by reading the [GrumpyIR Documentation](../doc/ir.md).

An example program on which your garbage-collected VM **should fail** is `tests/fact2.o`. Try running:

```
> ./vm tests/fact2.o
```

Your VM should print to `stderr` the statistics: 

```
GC start: heap_size = 1010 values
GC end: heap_size = 1010 values
```

but then immediately exit with a nonzero error code because the GC failed to free enough heap space to complete the allocation. Our VM produces: 

```
> ./vm tests/fact2.o
> echo $?
101
```

The program that generated `fact2.o` was:

```
(fun fact (x i32) -> i32
  (let a (alloc 100 0) 
       (seq (set a 0 x)
            (let y (get a 0)
                   (cond (== 0 y) 1 (* y (fact (- y 1))))))))
%
(fact 12)
```

## Extra Credit (Should we add the old Part II as extra credit or just remove this?)

For one or two points of extra credit:

* Implement channels as described in lecture: a synchronization primitive that allows two threads to simultaneously send and receive a single value.
* Demonstrate at least one test multithreaded program that uses your channel primitive to communicate between threads.
* In a one page design document, describe your implementation and any pitfalls you encountered along the way.

## Submission

1. To submit your project, commit to pa3-gc on or before the due date.
2. Thoroughly test your code (we expect at least 3 unit tests, including the 2 for Part I)


## Language Choice

As in PA2, you may pick from Rust, C, C++, Python, and OCaml to extend your VM. It will be easiest for you to just use the same language you used in PA2 unless you want to rewrite PA2 from scratch in a new language.

- If you use Rust, you won't need to change the layout of the submission other than adding your PA2 code.
- If you use any other language, then be sure to include the following in your submission
   ```
   README               <-- A short text document describing your project's architecture
   Makefile             <-- The Makefile used to build your project
   src/main.<c|cc|py|ml> <-- Your project's main file
   ```

NOTES:
* If you are not using Rust, your `Makefile` should contain the following targets:
  - `build`: compile your vm (for Python projects, this target can be a noop but must still exist)
  - `run`: run your vm; it should be called as `F=<file.o> make run`
  - `clean`: remove stale files (i.e. object files, or anything else generated during compilation)
* We will build your project on `pu2.cs.ohio.edu` (we suggest you test there).
* You may (optionally) include additional files that are called from `main`.

