pa/4.md, before:

# PA4: IR

Your job in this assignment is to translate programs in an intermediate representation, [GrumpyIR](../doc/ir.md), to equivalent [GrumpyVM](../doc/vm.md) assembly code.

```
                                                                             /--------------\
                                                                             |GC+Concurrency| <-- PA3
                                                                             \--------------/
                                                                                   |||
              /--------------\                /-------------\                /--------------\
<file.gpy> => |      ir      | => <file.s> => | assemble.rs | => <file.o> => |     vm       | => result
              \--------------/                \-------------/                \--------------/
                   ^| PA4                        ^| PA1                             ^| PA2
```

**TL;DR:** Consider the following program `fib.gpy` written in GrumpyIR:

```
(fun fib (x i32) -> i32
     (cond (== x 0) 1
           (cond (== x 1) 1
	   	 (+ (fib (- x 1)) (fib (- x 2))))))		 
%
(fib 20)
```

which calculates the 20th Fibonnaci number starting from 1.

Once you've completed PA4, doing the following:

```
> F=fib.gpy make run
```

should write on `stdout` an assembly program like:

```
setframe 0
push Lmain
call
halt
Lmain:
push 20
push Lfib
setframe 2
swap
call
ret
Lfib:
push 0
var 0
binary ==
push _L3
...
```

Your compiler may produce different code than the above. What matters is that it produces assembly code that behaves the same as the original GrumpyIR program, a notion we make precise below. 

## Suggested Implementation Strategy

We recommend you implement this assignment in the following stages:

### 1: Lex 

Build a function (or series of functions) that lexes input `.gpy` files into a series of tokens. Use either a lexer generator (like `flex` for C) or build your lexer by hand, probably relying on a regular expression library.

### 2: Parse 

The [GrumpyIR syntax](../doc/ir.md) was designed to be easy to parse (it's basically just S-expressions). We recommend that you build a recursive descent parser by hand following our demonstrations in lecture.

### 3: Generate Assembly Code

Use the lecture notes on [code generation](../doc/codegen.md) to guide you as you generate assembly code (recursively) from GrumpyIR programs. The assembly programs you generate should be valid according to the [grammar you built an assembler for in PA1](1.md). Start small, generating code first for expressions with no variables, then for expressions with variables and `let`s, then for complete programs with functions, etc. Test your code generator at each step, by actually running in your VM the code that you're producing.

### 4: Testing 

Test your code at each of the stages above, by writing unit tests and then by running your compiler on the following PA4-specific test cases in `pa/tests`: 

```
array.gpy
array2.gpy
array3.gpy
comment.gpy
div.gpy
fact.gpy
fact2.gpy
fib.gpy
fib-memo.gpy
funptr.gpy
funptr2.gpy
funptr3.gpy
heap.gpy
heap2.gpy
heap3.gpy
let1.gpy
let2.gpy
minus.gpy
multi-arg.gpy
neg.gpy
plus.gpy
seq.gpy
times.gpy
```

For each input `.gpy` file, your compiler should output to `stdout` an equivalent program. To test for equivalence, you can manually compare against the associated `.s` file that we've given you. Alternatively, and perhaps smarter, is to assemble and run the `.s` files you generate, comparing the results against the `.expected` files in the repository `pa/tests` directory. 

## Specifics

1. Write a program that compiles GrumpyIR programs in `<file.gpy>`, as defined by the grammar in [GrumpyIR](../doc/ir.md), to equivalent GrumpyVM assembly programs printed to `stdout`.

2. **Equivalent** means that the assembly programs you produce should halt (if the original GrumpyIR program did) with the source GrumpyIR program's result as the sole value on the stack.

3. This is a pair assignment. You may work with up to one other person. Only one person need submit. Both partners' names must be in your README.

4. You can test your compiler on the `.gpy` files we've added to the `/tests` directory for this assignment. One possible testing procedure is to compile each `.gpy` file to a `.s` file, then assemble and run the resulting code on your VM, making sure you get the `.expected` result. To do this, you can just run `grumpy-assembly-interp <file.s>` (this file is in /pa/tests in this repository) and verify the output is the same as in the `.expected` file.

5. You can assume that there is no variable shadowing in the `.gpy` files.

6. You can assume that there is no function-name shadowing in the `.gpy` files (that is, no function is defined more than once).

7. Submit individual files on Blackboard on or before the due date.

## Submission

1. You must use one of the following languages to implement your compiler: Rust, C, C++, Python, OCaml. In order for us to support submissions in multiple languages, *all* submissions must contain at least the following files:
   
   ```
   README               <-- A short text document describing your project's architecture
   Makefile             <-- The Makefile used to build your project
   Cargo.toml           <-- If you use Rust+Cargo
   main.<rs|c|cc|py|ml> <-- Your project's root file
   ```
   
   NOTES:
   * Your `Makefile` should contain the following targets:
      - `build`: build your compiler (for Python projects, this target can be a noop but must still exist)
      - `test`: runs your unit tests
      - `run`: run your comiler; it should be called as `F=<file.gpy> make run`
      - `clean`: remove stale files
   * We will build your project on `pu2.cs.ohio.edu` (we suggest you test there).
   * You may (optionally) include additional files that are called from `main`.
   * For Rust projects, you may use Cargo. However, you still need to provide the above `Makefile`.
      - Hint: Try `cargo build --release`. It optimizes and removes debug symbols so produces faster code.
      - You should also submit your Cargo.toml so your project actually builds when we run `make build`
   * Sample `Makefile`s for C++ and Rust will be uploaded to Blackboard. Feel free to reuse or adapt them.
   
 2. To submit your project, submit all your project files separately in Blackboard, under assignment `pa4`, on or before the due date.

Commit message:

Pa4 update (#2)
* Updated PA4 for 2020

All Blackboard references were updated. Removes Makefile requirement for
Rust submissions.

Still needs assignment link (once the assignment is created)

* Added testing requirements to PA4

* Update 4.md

Made it clear that code should be in the master branch when submitting.

* Updated pipeline for PA4

Removed reference to concurrency.

* Added assignment link to pa4

pa/4.md, after:

# PA4: IR

Your job in this assignment is to translate programs in an intermediate representation, [GrumpyIR](../doc/ir.md), to equivalent [GrumpyVM](../doc/vm.md) assembly code.

```
                                                                             /--------------\
                                                                             |     GC       | <-- PA3
                                                                             \--------------/
                                                                                   |||
              /--------------\                /-------------\                /--------------\
<file.gpy> => |      ir      | => <file.s> => | assemble.rs | => <file.o> => |     vm       | => result
              \--------------/                \-------------/                \--------------/
                   ^| PA4                        ^| PA1                             ^| PA2
```

**TL;DR:** Consider the following program `fib.gpy` written in GrumpyIR:

```
(fun fib (x i32) -> i32
     (cond (== x 0) 1
           (cond (== x 1) 1
	   	 (+ (fib (- x 1)) (fib (- x 2))))))		 
%
(fib 20)
```

which calculates the 20th Fibonnaci number starting from 1.

Once you've completed PA4, doing the following:

```
> cargo run fib.gpy # if you are using Rust
> F=fib.gpy make run # if you are using any other language
```

should write on `stdout` an assembly program like:

```
setframe 0
push Lmain
call
halt
Lmain:
push 20
push Lfib
setframe 2
swap
call
ret
Lfib:
push 0
var 0
binary ==
push _L3
...
```

Your compiler may produce different code than the above. What matters is that it produces assembly code that behaves the same as the original GrumpyIR program, a notion we make precise below. 

## Suggested Implementation Strategy

We recommend you implement this assignment in the following stages:

### 1: Lex 

Build a function (or series of functions) that lexes input `.gpy` files into a series of tokens. Use either a lexer generator (like `flex` for C) or build your lexer by hand, probably relying on a regular expression library.

### 2: Parse 

The [GrumpyIR syntax](../doc/ir.md) was designed to be easy to parse (it's basically just S-expressions). We recommend that you build a recursive descent parser by hand following our demonstrations in lecture.

### 3: Generate Assembly Code

Use the lecture notes on [code generation](../doc/codegen.md) to guide you as you generate assembly code (recursively) from GrumpyIR programs. The assembly programs you generate should be valid according to the [grammar you built an assembler for in PA1](1.md). Start small, generating code first for expressions with no variables, then for expressions with variables and `let`s, then for complete programs with functions, etc. Test your code generator at each step, by actually running in your VM the code that you're producing.

### 4: Testing 

Test your code at each of the stages above, by writing unit tests and then by running your compiler on the following PA4-specific test cases in `pa/tests`: 

```
array.gpy
array2.gpy
array3.gpy
comment.gpy
div.gpy
fact.gpy
fact2.gpy
fib.gpy
fib-memo.gpy
funptr.gpy
funptr2.gpy
funptr3.gpy
heap.gpy
heap2.gpy
heap3.gpy
let1.gpy
let2.gpy
minus.gpy
multi-arg.gpy
neg.gpy
plus.gpy
seq.gpy
times.gpy
```

For each input `.gpy` file, your compiler should output to `stdout` an equivalent program. To test for equivalence, you can manually compare against the associated `.s` file that we've given you. Alternatively, and perhaps smarter, is to assemble and run the `.s` files you generate, comparing the results against the `.expected` files in the repository `pa/tests` directory. 

## Specifics

1. Post a unique test case to Piazza (you only need one per team).

2. Write a program that compiles GrumpyIR programs in `<file.gpy>`, as defined by the grammar in [GrumpyIR](../doc/ir.md), to equivalent GrumpyVM assembly programs printed to `stdout`.

3. **Equivalent** means that the assembly programs you produce should halt (if the original GrumpyIR program did) with the source GrumpyIR program's result as the sole value on the stack.

4. This is a pair assignment. You may work with up to one other person. Only one person need submit. Both partners' names must be in your README.

5. You can test your compiler on the `.gpy` files we've added to the `/tests` directory for this assignment. One possible testing procedure is to compile each `.gpy` file to a `.s` file, then assemble and run the resulting code on your VM, making sure you get the `.expected` result. To do this, you can just run `grumpy-assembly-interp <file.s>` (this file is in /pa/tests in this repository) and verify the output is the same as in the `.expected` file.

6. You can assume that there is no variable shadowing in the `.gpy` files.

7. You can assume that there is no function-name shadowing in the `.gpy` files (that is, no function is defined more than once).

8. Be sure to write at least 3 non-trivial unit tests before submitting your assignment. These can test the parser or compiler.

9. Submit your code by making a commit to the master branch in your repository on or by the due date. We will grade your code based on the last commit to your master branch.

## Submission

1. You may use one of the following languages to implement your compiler: Rust, C, C++, Python, OCaml. In order for us to support submissions in multiple languages, *all* submissions must contain at least the following files:
   
   ```
   README               <-- A short text document describing your project's architecture
   Cargo.toml           <-- If you use Rust+Cargo
   Makefile             <-- If you use C/C++/Python/OCaml (Rust users may ignore this)
   main.<rs|c|cc|py|ml> <-- Your project's root file
   ```
   
   NOTES:
   * If you are not using Rust, your `Makefile` should contain the following targets:
      - `build`: build your compiler (for Python projects, this target can be a noop but must still exist)
      - `test`: runs your unit tests
      - `run`: run your comiler; it should be called as `F=<file.gpy> make run`
      - `clean`: remove stale files
   * We will build your project on `pu2.cs.ohio.edu` (we suggest you test there).
   * You may (optionally) include additional files that are called from `main`.
   
You can accept the assignment [here](https://classroom.github.com/g/SJB2XtKU).
