# Final Project: Optimizations

```
                                                                             /--------------\
                                                                             |     GC       | <-- PA3
                                                                             \--------------/
                PA5 |v                                                             |||
              /--------------\                /-------------\                /--------------\
<file.gpy> => |      ir      | => <file.s> => | assemble.rs | => <file.o> => |     vm       | => result
              \--------------/                \-------------/                \--------------/
                   ^| PA4                        ^| PA1                             ^| PA2
```

Your jobs in this assignment are to: 

0. Fix your code from [PA4](4.md).

1. Implement [tailcall optimization](../doc/tail-recursion.md) in your compiler.

When you submit this assignment, clearly indicate in your `README.md` how you'd like it to affect your grade. Your options are: 

* **NO EXAM:** This project will count as your final exam. Your grade on the project (out of 10) will be scaled to a final exam percentage grade (for example, if you got a `9/10` on the project, you'd get a `90%` on the exam).

* **EXTRA CREDIT:** This project will count as extra credit, replacing your lowest programming assignment grade so far. If you choose this option, **you're still required to take the final exam**.

**NOTE: This is an individual assignment. No collaboration, even in the form of high-level discussion, is allowed with anyone except course staff.**

**NOTE: No late days will be accepted (even if you have some left) on this assignment.**

## Specifics

The specific instructions for Part 0 are exactly the same as in [PA4](4.md).

For Part 1 (tailcall optimization): 

* Update your compiler so that it optimizes tail recursion to use constant stack space as described in [Tail Recursion](../doc/tail-recursion.md).

* Make sure your optimizing compiler passes all the previous test cases from [PA4](4.md).

* Make sure you additionally pass: 

```
tailcall.gpy
tailcall-fact.gpy
```

and that your compiler is producing constant-space code.

* In your README, include a short section on how you approached implementating tail recursion. For example, what changes did you make to your compiler? Include some before/after Grumpy assembly `.s` code examples for the test cases above to convince us that your optimized programs actually use constant stack space.

## Submission

1. You must use one of the following languages to implement your compiler: Rust, C, C++, Python, OCaml. In order for us to support submissions in multiple languages, *all* submissions must contain at least the following files:
   
   ```
   README               <-- A short text document describing your project's architecture
   Makefile             <-- The Makefile used to build your project (if you did not use Rust)
   Cargo.toml           <-- If you use Rust+Cargo
   main.<rs|c|cc|py|ml> <-- Your project's root file
   ```
   
   NOTES:
   * For non-Rust projects, your `Makefile` should contain the following targets:
      - `build`: build your compiler (for Python projects, this target can be a noop but must still exist)
      - `test`: runs your unit tests
      - `run`: run your compiler; it should be called as `F=<file.gpy> make run`
      - `clean`: remove stale files
   * We will build your project on `pu3.cs.ohio.edu` (we suggest you test there).
   * You may (optionally) include additional files that are called from `main`.
   
 2. To submit your project, commit your code to your repository on or before the due date.
